support tiered storage proposal (#99)
strimzi/proposals: 062-support-tiered-storage.md

For simplicity, the proposal doesn't add support to customize `RemoteLogMetadataManager`. If tiered storage is enabled, the default implementation class `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` in Kafka will be used.

This proposal focuses on tiered storage support with a custom plugin brought in by the user. Other proposals in the future might add some built-in support for selected storage implementations such as S3. It should also be noted that, it’s on the end-user to ensure that their tiered storage setup works with Strimzi; the operator itself is strictly responsible for pushing down the necessary config to the broker pods.

## Proposal

Add a `spec.kafka.tieredStorage` field in the `Kafka` CR, which would support configuration for all tiered storage related configuration.

The `tieredStorage` config contains configuration for some selected configuration of tiered storage feature. Most importantly, the configuration for `RemoteStorageManager` is needed.

```
kafka:
  tieredStorage:
    type: custom
    rsm.className:
    rsm.classPath:
    rsm.impl.prefix: rsm.config.

> ```

Reviewer: Please see the larger comment below concerning the API.

### RemoteStorageManager (RSM)

The RSM config only supports custom type. The config allows users to specify the RSM class information.

Because the `RemoteStorageManager` dependency is provided by Kafka plugin, the implementation could vary case by case. It’s important to allow user to pass in additional configuration values within the supplied prefix range. The custom configuration can be supplied via  `spec.kafka.config` with the predefined prefix.

### RemoteLogMetadataManager (RLMM)

For simplicity, the proposal doesn't add customization for RemoteLogMetadataManager. If tiered storage is enabled, the default implementation using `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` will be used, and corresponding configuration will be appended. 

> Since the default RLMM will create an internal Kafka client to talk to the server, there might be some additional configuration needed, like the SSL related setting. Those config can be put in `.spec.kafka.config` directly using the `rlmm.config.` prefix. Example can be found below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Strimzi Cluster Operator will automatically configure any required configurations for the RLMM such as the security configs required to create the internal Kafka client and talk to the brokers.
Any additional RLMM configuration options such as performance tuning or other options can be put in `.spec.kafka.config` directly using the `rlmm.config.` prefix.
Example can be found below.
```

### Example configuration

The below config define a sample configuration for tiered storage setup, using a `custom` RSM type.
```

> kafka:

Reviewer: Thinking a bit more about this API ... what if we used something like this:

Thinking 

```yaml
kafka:
  tieredStorage:
    type: customRemoteStorageManager
    className: com.example.kafka.tiered.storage.s3.S3RemoteStorageManager
    classPath:  /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/*
    config: 
      # A map with String keys and String values. Keys will be automatically prefixed with `rcm.config.`.
      storage.bucket.name: my-bucket
  config:
    ...
    rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.topic.replication.factor: 1
```

* The `type: customRemoteStorageManager` should make it more clear that this uses Kafka's `RemoteLogMetadataManager` and allows us to add some other custom types including a custom `RemoteLogMetadataManager` in the future.
* I do not think we need the `rsm.` prefix as the type makes it more clear that we configure the RemoteStorageManager. But if you think it should be there, we should avoid the dot-notation and call it just `rsmClassName` & `rsmClassPath`.
* I would add there a `config` section that will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.` and that can be used for any configuration specific to the RemoteStorageManager implementation.

The basic RLLM configuration will be done by Strimzi and only some finetuning will be done in the `.spec.kafka.config` section. The configuration above will result in a Kafka broker configuration containing this:

```properties
# RLMM configuration generated by Strimzi
remote.log.storage.system.enable=true
remote.log.metadata.manager.class.name=org.apache.kafka.server.log.remote.metadata.storage.TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager
remote.log.metadata.manager.impl.prefix=rlmm.config.
remote.log.metadata.manager.listener.name=REPLICATION-9091
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.security.protocol=SSL
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.ssl.keystore.location=/tmp/kafka/cluster.keystore.p12
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.ssl.keystore.password=${CERTS_STORE_PASSWORD}
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.ssl.keystore.type=PKCS12
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.ssl.truststore.location=/tmp/kafka/cluster.truststore.p12
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.ssl.keystore.password=${CERTS_STORE_PASSWORD}
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.ssl.truststore.type=PKCS12

# Custom RLMM configs
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.topic.replication.factor=1

#RSM configs set by the operator and by the user
remote.log.storage.manager.class.path=/opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/*
remote.log.storage.manager.class.name=com.example.kafka.tiered.storage.s3.S3RemoteStorageManager
remote.log.storage.manager.impl.prefix=rsm.config.
rsm.config.storage.bucket.name=my-bucket
```

That looks like something that matches the existing Strimzi APIs and allows to configure what is needed? WDYT?

Author: Thanks for the suggestion! Updated with API, have some minor update for the rlmm security config because those are actually fall under "custom RLMM config section".

    type: custom
    rsm.className: com.example.kafka.tiered.storage.s3.S3RemoteStorageManager
    rsm.classPath:  /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/*
    rsm.impl.prefix: rsm.config.

  config:
    ...
    rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.bootstrap.servers: broker-bootstrap.com:9091
    rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.security.protocol: SSL
```

The configuration above will get translated to the below Kafka broker config:
```
remote.log.storage.system.enable: true
remote.log.storage.manager.class.name: com.example.kafka.tiered.storage.s3.S3RemoteStorageManager
remote.log.storage.manager.class.path: /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/*
remote.log.storage.manager.impl.prefix: rsm.config.
# The RLMM config will be added by default
remote.log.metadata.manager.impl.prefix: rlmm.config.
remote.log.metadata.manager.class.name: org.apache.kafka.server.log.remote.metadata.storage.TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager
# The RLMM config below are passed down from kafka config spec.
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.bootstrap.servers: broker-bootstrap.com:9091
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.security.protocol: SSL
```

### Validation

> There are certain [limitations](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/Kafka+Tiered+Storage+Early+Access+Release+Notes) for tiered storage enabled cluster.
> 
> With Strimzi operator, we can validate the configuration before apply the change. Here are some validations we can apply:
> 
> * Tiered storage should not be disabled at cluster level when there is any existing topic enabled tiered storage.
> 
> * Tiered storage should not be enabled on a cluster with JBOD.
> 
> * Tiered storage should not be applied for compact topic.

Reviewer: I think that validating all of these would be quite complicated - the JBOD storage should be quite simple. But the rest would not. You should either take the pragmatic way and leave it to the user or you will need to figure out and elaborate on how to do such validation.

```suggestion
There are certain [limitations](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/Kafka+Tiered+Storage+Early+Access+Release+Notes) for tiered storage enabled cluster.
For example:
* Tiered storage should not be disabled at cluster level when there is any existing topic enabled tiered storage.
* Tiered storage should not be enabled on a cluster with JBOD.
* Tiered storage should not be applied for compact topic.

Some of those - such as the JBOD storage support - are easy to validate in the operator and will be validated automatically.
Others - such as not enabling it on compacted topics or not disabling it while any topics using tiered storage still exist would add too much complexity and it will be the responsibility of the users to take care of them.
```

Reviewer 2: As a user of strimzi I'd like to see the validation of these items within strimzi tbh. At least for the limitations that concern topic-level items there should be validation if these are controlled by the UTO. I can see a case for leaving the validation of non-managed topics to the user on the other hand. 

This "split" of the validation would cover our use-case well as we have a policy to have any "stateful" (not really stateful but somewhat statey) topics defined as `KafkaTopics` while allowing other topics to be directly generated if it doesn't matter at all if they are lost.

Reviewer: Doing these validations:
* Would likely be a big setback for the tiered storage support in Strimzi in terms of this proposal being approved and implemented. Some of them might not even be possible to check.
* A lot of these are limitations of the Kafka implementation and I guess many of them are expected to be implemented in the future. So implementing them would be also possibly a waste of resources.

> This "split" of the validation would cover our use-case well as we have a policy to have any "stateful" (not really stateful but somewhat statey) topics defined as KafkaTopics while allowing other topics to be directly generated if it doesn't matter at all if they are lost.

This might apply in your case, but I do not think this can be generalized. Many important topics are created outside of the Topic Operator - Connect topics, Kafka Streams API topics etc.

Reviewer 2: > * A lot of these are limitations of the Kafka implementation and I guess many of them are expected to be implemented in the future. So implementing them would be also possibly a waste of resources.

It may be worth checking out the KIPs to find out which limitations are intended to remain and which are just transient until tiered storage is feature complete. I'll see if I can find anything that I would consider to be worth it to validate in strimzi. 

> This might apply in your case, but I do not think this can be generalized.

I agree that the "statefulness" discussion may be specific to our use-case, I do believe that the expectation of other users is similar however. IMO if you are not managing a topic with the UTO then you aren't expecting strimzi to handle anything about it. In general however I think the impact of TS on the TO hasn't been handled, however this is mentioned in a separate review thread so we can probably see what happens there.

Reviewer: Thinking about this a bit more:
* The proposal now links to the list of limitations in Kafka Wiki. But as these might get edited with future releases, it would be good to copy the limitations into this proposal to understand the state as it was when this proposal was written.
* I asked and all of the limitations (apart from the client compatibility) are expected to be fixed before it is production-ready in Kafka. This is worth mentioning here as well.
* As for the Topic Operator ... I did not tried it, but I expect Kafka to handle these limitations and validate them when managing topics? So any special treatment in Topic Operator will be just changing the Kafka exception for a Strimzi exception and not sure it really adds value.

If we are not sure users will understand all the limitations, we can also consider adding a feature gate to protect the Tiered Storage:
* If it is disabled, the `tieredStorage` section from the Kafka CR will be essentially ignored
* By enabling it, users confirm they understand the limitations
* Once it moves out of early access in Kafka and the limitations are fixed, we can enable the feature gate by default.

I'm not saying this should be added to the proposal right away -> just adding it as an option for the consideration by others @strimzi/maintainers, @Staniel and @siegenthalerroger

### Docker image

This proposal doesn't include built in plugin support in any Strimzi built Kafka image. Users need to specify the path via the config, and customize the docker image to include the library.

An example to build such custom image is via a custom Dockerfile:

```

> FROM quay.io/strimzi/kafka:latest-kafka-3.6.0

Reviewer: Let's use a fixed version and not `latest`.

```suggestion
FROM quay.io/strimzi/kafka:0.40.0-kafka-3.6.0
```

Author: done

#  Support tiered storage natively in Strimzi

## Current situation

Kafka introduced tiered storage feature since 3.6. The feature is in early stage and it’s nice to support tiered storage configuration natively via Strimzi.

## Motivation

Supporting tiered storage via Strimzi allow Strimzi users to enable tiered storage natively with Strimzi config. By allowing to config custom configuration for RemoteStorageManager and RemoteLogMetadataManager, users are able to adopt tiered storage feature on Strimzi easily.

> It should also be noted that, it’s on the end-user to ensure that their tiered storage setup works with Strimzi; the operator itself is strictly responsible for pushing down the necessary config to the broker pods.

Reviewer: Might be worth explaining that this proposal focuses on tiered storage support with a custom plugin brought in by the user. But other proposals in the future might add some built-in support for selected storage implementations such as S3. That will add some more clarity for users reading it.

Author: Done

## Proposal

### RemoteStorage

Add a RemoteStorage class under storage config (under https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/configuring.html#type-KafkaClusterSpec-schema-reference), which would support configuration for all tiered storage related configuration.

The RemoteStorage class contains configuration for various aspects, including system config, RSM specific config, RLMM specific config.

```
kafka:
  storage:
    remote:
      enabled: true
      rlm:
        # See below detail
      rsm:
        # See below detail
      rlmm:

>         # See below detail

Reviewer: I wonder if there should be some new `tieredStorage` option rather then pushing this into the `storage` section. Especially given the the current `storage` will be gone from the Kafka CR soon and move into the `KafkaNodePool` resources, but the tired storage configuration should probably stay inside the `Kafka` CR.

You might also need to use some `type: custom` differentiator or have some `customTieredStorage` subsection (e.g. `.spec.kafka.tiredStorage.customTieredStorage`). The presence or absence of this section would define if it i enbaled or disabled. So I do not think you need the `enabled` field.

Author: Done

```

### RLM

The RLM config supports `default` type only.  The config allows users to specify basic configuration for RemoteLogManager in Kafka:

```
      rlm:
        threadPoolSize:
        reader.threads:

>         reader.maxPendingTasks:

Reviewer: Should this be really specified here? Can't the users use the `.spec.kafka.config` section for it if needed?

Author: Theoretically, user can specify everything via .spec.kafka.config. That was the original proposal for. Here the config was highlighted and configured at RLM section to make sure tiered storage config are handled in 1 place, instead of spreading in different sections.

Reviewer: The way this needs to be done is that the operator takes responsibility and ownership of some _selected_ fields. For example around security, what listener should be used, how to authenticate with Kafka etc. These fields should be not available to users for any customization and are driven through the Kafka custom resource API. The rest of the configuration can live in `.spec.kafka.config` which is the place where the configuration lives in general. It makes it easier that way exactly because it leaves all the things handled in one place - the whole validation of the configuration etc. You also want to be careful about having dedicated fields in the API for various options -> they make the APi big, but also make it hard to add or remove options. The `.spec.kafka.config` is opaque map where you can easily add custom configurations without any special support.

Author: Understood. I revise the config to minimal now.

```

### RSM

The RSM config only supports custom type. The config allows users to specify the RSM class information as well as other properties. 

Because the `RemoteStorageManager` dependency is provided by Kafka plugin, the implementation could vary case by case. It’s important to allow user to pass in additional configuration values within the supplied prefix range, thus config field is provided to pass in and generate such properties.

```
      rsm:
        type: custom
        class.name:
        class.path:  
        impl.prefix: rsm.config.
        config:
          property1:
          property2:
          ...
```

> ### RLMM

Reviewer: Why do you need the custom metadata manager? I think you should simply say that this supports only implementations based on the `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` and that way hide all of this. Or do you really need support for a custom manager? Then you cannot bootstrap the security easily.

Author: For us we use the default implementation, but I know other companies like AWS are using their own custom implementation. The custom metadata config is definitely useful for future user adoption.

Another reason is, I need to allow customization on metadata manager's internal Kafka client config. In theory that can also be done via kafka.config, but again, I put it here for clarify and easier maintenance. 

Let me know if you are ok with keep it here or not, I am happy to adjust.

Reviewer: > For us we use the default implementation, but I know other companies like AWS are using their own custom implementation. The custom metadata config is definitely useful for future user adoption.

I do not think AWS uses Strimzi. If they do and need this, they can comment on it. It problem I see is that we should not overcomplicate the design to match some virtual scenarios. Also, if you use custom metadata manager, Stirmzi will not know how to bootstrap it, so not sure what value does this option give you.

> Another reason is, I need to allow customization on metadata manager's internal Kafka client config. In theory that can also be done via kafka.config, but again, I put it here for clarify and easier maintenance.

Why do you need that? What do you need to customize and how? Maybe some intro to how the tiered storage works, what are the two different parts and what might be the use cases for different configurations would be useful as an intro to this proposal to bring everyone to the same understanding what and why is needed.

But from my perspective, we want to make this a stable API where the operator does some of the configuration work to guarantee that it will work in the long term. But that always requires some opinionated configuration and does not give you complete freedom. So there are tradeoffs you need to make. So we need to have clarity at what customizations are allowed and which are not.

Author: I revise the config now so these config are not in the tieredstorage section.

For your information, the RLMM implementation contains a Kafka client talking to local Kafka cluster. We need to customize some configuration of the Kafka client based on various need, and that is probably unique to our use case, e.g. on some SSL config. We can customize that via `spec.kafka.config` as well.

#  Support tiered storage natively in Strimzi

## Current situation

> Kafka introduced tiered storage feature since 3.6. The feature is in early stage and it’s nice to support tiered storage configuration natively via Strimzi.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kafka introduced tiered storage feature since 3.6. The feature is in early stage and it’s nice to support tiered storage configuration natively in Strimzi.
```

## Motivation

> Supporting tiered storage via Strimzi allow Strimzi users to enable tiered storage natively with Strimzi config. By allowing to config custom configuration for `RemoteStorageManager`, users are able to adopt tiered storage feature on Strimzi easily.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Supporting tiered storage in Strimzi would allow Strimzi users to enable tiered storage natively with Strimzi config. By allowing custom configuration of Kafka's `RemoteStorageManager` interface, Strimzi users would be able to easily adopt the tiered storage feature.
```

> Supporting tiered storage via Strimzi allow Strimzi users to enable tiered storage natively with Strimzi config. By allowing to config custom configuration for `RemoteStorageManager`, users are able to adopt tiered storage feature on Strimzi easily.

Reviewer 3: I think we need some link to code or official Kafka documentation where readers can get more info about this `RemoteStorageManager`, even because it's the first time you mention it by assuming people already know about it.

Author: I add a reference to KIP405 here, hope it helps.

For simplicity, the proposal doesn't add support to customize `RemoteLogMetadataManager`. If tiered storage is enabled, the default implementation class `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` in Kafka will be used.

This proposal focuses on tiered storage support with a custom plugin brought in by the user. Other proposals in the future might add some built-in support for selected storage implementations such as S3. It should also be noted that, it’s on the end-user to ensure that their tiered storage setup works with Strimzi; the operator itself is strictly responsible for pushing down the necessary config to the broker pods.

## Proposal

Add a `spec.kafka.tieredStorage` field in the `Kafka` CR, which would support configuration for all tiered storage related configuration.

The `tieredStorage` config contains configuration for some selected configuration of tiered storage feature. Most importantly, the configuration for `RemoteStorageManager` is needed.

```
kafka:
  tieredStorage:
    type: customRemoteStorageManager
    className:
    classPath:
    config:

>     # A map with String keys and String values. Keys will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.`.

Reviewer 3: `Keys will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.`` ... what does it mean? can you elaborate a little bit more? where and when they will be prefixed? It will be done by the operator when translating everything to a broker configuration but this comment here doesn't make it clear to the reader for the first time.

Author: Updated to `Keys will be automatically prefixed with rsm.config. and appended to Kafka broker config`

E.g. if I put a `storage.bucket.name: my-bucket` here, at Kafka broker config, a config called `rsm.config.storage.bucket.name: my-bucket` will be applied.

The translation should be appended by strimzi operator.

Author: Updated to `Keys will be automatically prefixed with rsm.config. and appended to Kafka broker config`

E.g. if I put a `storage.bucket.name: my-bucket` here, at Kafka broker config, a config called `rsm.config.storage.bucket.name: my-bucket` will be applied.

The translation should be appended by strimzi operator.

```

### RemoteStorageManager (RSM)

The RSM config only supports custom type. The config allows users to specify the RSM class information.

> Because the `RemoteStorageManager` dependency is provided by Kafka plugin, the implementation could vary case by case. It’s important to allow user to pass in additional configuration values within the supplied prefix range. The custom configuration can be supplied via  `spec.kafka.config` with the predefined prefix.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Because the `RemoteStorageManager` dependency is provided by a Kafka plugin, the implementation could vary case by case. It’s important to allow users to pass in additional configuration values within the supplied prefix range. The custom configuration can be supplied via  `spec.kafka.config` with the predefined prefix.
```

### RemoteLogMetadataManager (RLMM)

> For simplicity, the proposal doesn't add customization for RemoteLogMetadataManager. If tiered storage is enabled, the default implementation using `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` will be used, and corresponding configuration will be appended. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For simplicity, the proposal doesn't add customization for `RemoteLogMetadataManager`. If tiered storage is enabled, the default implementation using `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` will be used, and corresponding configuration will be appended. 
```

  config:
    ...
    rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.bootstrap.servers: broker-bootstrap.com:9091
    rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.security.protocol: SSL
    rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.topic.replication.factor: 1
```

The configuration above will get translated to the below Kafka broker config:
```
# RLMM configuration generated by Strimzi
remote.log.storage.system.enable: true
remote.log.metadata.manager.impl.prefix: rlmm.config.
remote.log.metadata.manager.class.name: org.apache.kafka.server.log.remote.metadata.storage.TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager
#RSM configs set by the operator and by the user
remote.log.storage.manager.class.name: com.example.kafka.tiered.storage.s3.S3RemoteStorageManager
remote.log.storage.manager.class.path: /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/*
remote.log.storage.manager.impl.prefix: rsm.config.
rsm.config.storage.bucket.name=my-bucket
# # Custom RLMM configs
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.bootstrap.servers: broker-bootstrap.com:9091
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.security.protocol: SSL
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.topic.replication.factor: 1
```

### Validation

> There are certain [limitations](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/Kafka+Tiered+Storage+Early+Access+Release+Notes) for tiered storage enabled cluster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are certain [limitations](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/Kafka+Tiered+Storage+Early+Access+Release+Notes) for a tiered storage enabled cluster.
```

> We choose not to validate the error conditions at Strimzi operator layer because:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We choose not to validate the error conditions at the Strimzi operator layer because:
```

* At least some of them are expected to be removed in the future
* Validating them might be quite complex (for example, IIRC, the compacted topics can be set in the topic itself as well as in the broker defaults)

> * Validating this in UTO would capture only a part of the topics and not prevent the users from misconfiguration. So they will still need to be aware of these rules and learn to respect them.

Reviewer 4: I guess these rules would be covered in supporting Strimzi documentation? Do we mention?

Author: Hi Paul, thank you for your comment, I am not sure if I get this question, to be clear these are not rules but just justifications on why we not want to do exhaustive validations for those limitations.

### Docker image

This proposal doesn't include built in plugin support in any Strimzi built Kafka image. Users need to specify the path via the config, and customize the docker image to include the library.

An example to build such custom image is via a custom Dockerfile:

```
FROM quay.io/strimzi/kafka:0.40.0-kafka-3.6.0
ARG REMOTE_PLUGIN_PATH
COPY ${REMOTE_PLUGIN_PATH} /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/

> ```

Reviewer 3: I would also add an example docker command to build the image passing the needed arg as well.

## Testing strategy

> Unit tests will be added to validate all the RLM,RSM, RLMM changes are propagated through.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Unit tests will be added to validate that all the RLM, RSM, and RLMM changes are propagated through.
```

Because the RSM and RLMM are typically provided by user and there is no built in support for any third party cloud provider, there won’t be any integration tests covering the cloud provider interaction. It’s the user’s responsibility to ensure the RSM and RLMM works with the intended cloud provider.

> For testing purpose, an integration test with LocalTieredStorage implementation can be added to ensure end to end functionality.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For testing purposes, an integration test with `LocalTieredStorage` implementation can be added to ensure end-to-end functionality.
```

## Affected Projects

Strimzi operator will be affected with the change.

## Compatibility

> This proposal only add new configuration and API, so there is no backward compatibility issue for existing APIs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This proposal adds a new API and configuration, so there are no backward compatibility issues with the existing APIs.
```

For simplicity, the proposal doesn't add support to customize `RemoteLogMetadataManager`. If tiered storage is enabled, the default implementation class `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` in Kafka will be used.

This proposal focuses on tiered storage support with a custom plugin brought in by the user. Other proposals in the future might add some built-in support for selected storage implementations such as S3. It should also be noted that, it’s on the end-user to ensure that their tiered storage setup works with Strimzi; the operator itself is strictly responsible for pushing down the necessary config to the broker pods.

## Proposal

Add a `spec.kafka.tieredStorage` field in the `Kafka` CR, which would support configuration for all tiered storage related configuration.

The `tieredStorage` config contains configuration for some selected configuration of tiered storage feature. Most importantly, the configuration for `RemoteStorageManager` is needed.

```

> kafka:
>   tieredStorage:
>     type: customRemoteStorageManager
>     className:
>     classPath:
>     config:
>     # A map with String keys and String values. Keys will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.`.
> 

Reviewer: Just fix the alignment and add some placeholder values to make it more clear how will it look like.

```suggestion
kafka:
  tieredStorage:
    type: customRemoteStorageManager
    className: <ClassName>
    classPath: <ClassPath>
    config:
      # A map with String keys and String values. Keys will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.`.
      <key>: <value>
```

### RemoteLogMetadataManager (RLMM)

For simplicity, the proposal doesn't add customization for `RemoteLogMetadataManager`. If tiered storage is enabled, the default implementation using `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` will be used, and corresponding configuration will be appended.

The Strimzi Cluster Operator will automatically configure any required configurations for the RLMM such as the basic thread pool configs required to create the internal Kafka client and talk to the brokers.

Any additional RLMM configuration options such as performance tuning or security config options can be put in `.spec.kafka.config` directly using the `rlmm.config.` prefix.

Example can be found below.

### Example configuration

The below config define a sample configuration for tiered storage setup, using a `custom` RSM type.
```
kafka:
  tieredStorage:
    type: customRemoteStorageManager
    className: com.example.kafka.tiered.storage.s3.S3RemoteStorageManager
    classPath: /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/*
    config:

>     # A map with String keys and String values. Key fields will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.` and appended to Kafka broker config.

Reviewer: Just fix the alignment.

```suggestion
      # A map with String keys and String values. Key fields will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.` and appended to Kafka broker config.
```

      storage.bucket.name: my-bucket
  config:
    ...
    rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.bootstrap.servers: broker-bootstrap.com:9091
    rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.security.protocol: SSL
    rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.topic.replication.factor: 1
```

The configuration above will get translated to the below Kafka broker config:
```

> # RLMM configuration generated by Strimzi
> remote.log.storage.system.enable: true
> remote.log.metadata.manager.impl.prefix: rlmm.config.
> remote.log.metadata.manager.class.name: org.apache.kafka.server.log.remote.metadata.storage.TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager
> #RSM configs set by the operator and by the user
> remote.log.storage.manager.class.name: com.example.kafka.tiered.storage.s3.S3RemoteStorageManager
> remote.log.storage.manager.class.path: /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/*
> remote.log.storage.manager.impl.prefix: rsm.config.
> rsm.config.storage.bucket.name=my-bucket
> # # Custom RLMM configs
> rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.bootstrap.servers: broker-bootstrap.com:9091
> rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.security.protocol: SSL
> rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.topic.replication.factor: 1

Reviewer: As described in the comment earlier, I think this iwll likely look more like this:

```suggestion
# RLMM configuration generated by Strimzi
remote.log.storage.system.enable=true
remote.log.metadata.manager.class.name=org.apache.kafka.server.log.remote.metadata.storage.TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager
remote.log.metadata.manager.impl.prefix=rlmm.config.
remote.log.metadata.manager.listener.name=REPLICATION-9091
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.security.protocol=SSL
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.ssl.keystore.location=/tmp/kafka/cluster.keystore.p12
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.ssl.keystore.password=${CERTS_STORE_PASSWORD}
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.ssl.keystore.type=PKCS12
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.ssl.truststore.location=/tmp/kafka/cluster.truststore.p12
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.ssl.keystore.password=${CERTS_STORE_PASSWORD}
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.ssl.truststore.type=PKCS12

# Custom RLMM configs
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.topic.replication.factor=1

# RSM configs set by the operator and by the user
remote.log.storage.manager.class.path=/opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/*
remote.log.storage.manager.class.name=com.example.kafka.tiered.storage.s3.S3RemoteStorageManager
remote.log.storage.manager.impl.prefix=rsm.config.
rsm.config.storage.bucket.name=my-bucket
```

Author: @scholzj, the config I added is slightly different than the one you mentioned. I replied before but to make it clear, those `rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client` config should not fall into Strimzi generated config. It needs client customization because the Kafka cluster could use different SSL mechanism and it doesn't necessarily use these config. So I put these into `# RSM configs set by the operator and by the user`

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand/agree. It needs to connect to the Kafka cluster. That can be done through the replication listener po port 9091 which is used for other internal tooling and has its security configured by the operator. So it is (currently) always mTLS. So this can be configured by the operator and should be configured by the operator.

Author: You are right. Updated. Thanks for the catch!

### Docker image

This proposal doesn't include built in plugin support in any Strimzi built Kafka image. Users need to specify the path via the config, and customize the docker image to include the library.

An example to build such custom image is via a custom Dockerfile:

```
FROM quay.io/strimzi/kafka:0.40.0-kafka-3.6.0
ARG REMOTE_PLUGIN_PATH
COPY ${REMOTE_PLUGIN_PATH} /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/
```

An image with plugin library can be built with the following command:

```
docker build -t docker.example.com/tierstorage/kafka:0.40.0-kafka-3.6.0-plugin-1 . -build-arg REMOTE_PLUGIN_PATH=./s3/build/install/s3/*
```
## Testing strategy

Unit tests will be added to validate that all the RLM, RSM, and RLMM changes are propagated through.
Because the RSM and RLMM are typically provided by user and there is no built in support for any third party cloud provider, there won’t be any integration tests covering the cloud provider interaction. It’s the user’s responsibility to ensure the RSM and RLMM works with the intended cloud provider.

> For testing purposes, an integration test with `LocalTieredStorage` implementation can be added to ensure end-to-end functionality.

Reviewer: I guess it would be a system test in a Strimzi terminology.

```suggestion
For testing purposes, an system test with `LocalTieredStorage` implementation can be added to ensure end-to-end functionality.
```

## Affected Projects

Strimzi operator will be affected with the change.

## Compatibility

This proposal adds a new API and configuration, so there are no backward compatibility issues with the existing APIs.

## Alternate consideration

A simple way is to set everything via Helm chart config: https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/98

> That option is not favored because it's not applicable to usage without helm chart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That option is not favored because it's not applicable to usage without helm chart.
It might also not be able to guarantee compatibility with future Stirmzi versions.
```

For simplicity, the proposal doesn't add support to customize `RemoteLogMetadataManager`. If tiered storage is enabled, the default implementation class `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` in Kafka will be used.

This proposal focuses on tiered storage support with a custom plugin brought in by the user. Other proposals in the future might add some built-in support for selected storage implementations such as S3. It should also be noted that, it’s on the end-user to ensure that their tiered storage setup works with Strimzi; the operator itself is strictly responsible for pushing down the necessary config to the broker pods.

## Proposal

Add a `spec.kafka.tieredStorage` field in the `Kafka` CR, which would support configuration for all tiered storage related configuration.

The `tieredStorage` config contains configuration for some selected configuration of tiered storage feature. Most importantly, the configuration for `RemoteStorageManager` is needed.

```
kafka:
  tieredStorage:
    type: customRemoteStorageManager
    className: <ClassName>
    classPath: <ClassPath>
    config:

>       # A map with String keys and String values. Keys will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.`.

Reviewer 3: we should have what we have in the example here ...

`# A map with String keys and String values. Key fields will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.` and appended to Kafka broker config.` 

because it's the first time we introduce the config part.

Author: Good catch, thanks!

    classPath: /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/*
    config:
      # A map with String keys and String values. Key fields will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.` and appended to Kafka broker config.
      storage.bucket.name: my-bucket
  config:
    ...
    rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.bootstrap.servers: broker-bootstrap.com:9091
    rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.security.protocol: SSL
    rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.topic.replication.factor: 1
```

The configuration above will get translated to the below Kafka broker config:
```
# RLMM configuration generated by Strimzi
remote.log.storage.system.enable: true
remote.log.metadata.manager.impl.prefix: rlmm.config.
remote.log.metadata.manager.class.name: org.apache.kafka.server.log.remote.metadata.storage.TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager
#RSM configs set by the operator and by the user
remote.log.storage.manager.class.name: com.example.kafka.tiered.storage.s3.S3RemoteStorageManager
remote.log.storage.manager.class.path: /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/*
remote.log.storage.manager.impl.prefix: rsm.config.
rsm.config.storage.bucket.name=my-bucket

> # # Custom RLMM configs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Custom RLMM configs
```

COPY ${REMOTE_PLUGIN_PATH} /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/
```

An image with plugin library can be built with the following command:

```
docker build -t docker.example.com/tierstorage/kafka:0.40.0-kafka-3.6.0-plugin-1 . -build-arg REMOTE_PLUGIN_PATH=./s3/build/install/s3/*
```
## Testing strategy

Unit tests will be added to validate that all the RLM, RSM, and RLMM changes are propagated through.
Because the RSM and RLMM are typically provided by user and there is no built in support for any third party cloud provider, there won’t be any integration tests covering the cloud provider interaction. It’s the user’s responsibility to ensure the RSM and RLMM works with the intended cloud provider.

For testing purposes, a system test with `LocalTieredStorage` implementation can be added to ensure end-to-end functionality.

## Affected Projects

Strimzi operator will be affected with the change.

## Compatibility

This proposal adds a new API and configuration, so there are no backward compatibility issues with the existing APIs.

## Alternate consideration

A simple way is to set everything via Helm chart config: https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/98

> That option is not favored because it's not applicable to usage without helm chart. It might also not be able to guarantee compatibility with future Stirmzi versions.

Reviewer: Just two typos

```suggestion
That option is not favored because it's not applicable to usage without Helm chart. It might also not be able to guarantee compatibility with future Strimzi versions.
```

Author: done

This proposal focuses on tiered storage support with a custom plugin brought in by the user. Other proposals in the future might add some built-in support for selected storage implementations such as S3. It should also be noted that, it’s on the end-user to ensure that their tiered storage setup works with Strimzi; the operator itself is strictly responsible for pushing down the necessary config to the broker pods.

## Proposal

Add a `spec.kafka.tieredStorage` field in the `Kafka` CR, which would support configuration for all tiered storage related configuration.

The `tieredStorage` config contains configuration for some selected configuration of tiered storage feature. Most importantly, the configuration for `RemoteStorageManager` is needed.

```
kafka:
  tieredStorage:
    type: customRemoteStorageManager
    className: <ClassName>
    classPath: <ClassPath>
    config:
      # A map with String keys and String values. Key fields will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.` and appended to Kafka broker config.

>       <key>: <value>

Reviewer 5: This allows configuring the RSM, but it doesn't look like it provides an obvious place to add configuration for the RLMM should we later want to support other implementations of that. 

* You could just shoehorn in some additional properties alongside the `type` etc:
    ```yaml
    tieredStorage:
      type: customRemoteStorageManager
      className: <ClassName>
      classPath: <ClassPath>
      config: ...
      rlmmClassName: <ClassName>
      rlmmConfig: ...
    ```
    but this looks quite ugly, imho.
* You could add an extra layer of nesting, so that tieredStorage` has a property for RSM (which is an object with `type`, `className` etc) and a separate property for the RLMM.
* You could just have a `remoteLogMetadataManager` property alongside the `tieredStorage` one. 

My understanding is that these two interfaces are independent, so I think I'd favour the last one, but with a slight twist: Rather than `tieredStorage` it should be `remoteStorageManager`, since that's all it's configuring: 

```yaml
remoteStorageManager: # I've just renamed this from tieredStorage
  type: customRemoteStorageManager
  className: <ClassName>
  classPath: <ClassPath>
  config: ...
remoteLogMetadataManager: # not part of this Proposal, but possibly in a future Proposal
  className: <ClassName>
  config: ...
```

Reviewer: As stated in the proposal. We decided not to support custom RLMM here. That is why it is called `customRemoteStorageManager`.

Reviewer: I mean, we can discuss it again if needed of course. But I think this is the assumption under which it was approved.

Reviewer 5: My point is that "configuring tiered storage" boils down to configuring two things: the RSM and the RLMM. It's fine that this proposal only tackles one of those and assumes the default RLMM implementation. But it looks like the proposed CR API won't accommodate customising the RLMM in the future without it looking awkward. It would be counter-intuitive for the RLMM to be configured outside the `tieredStorage` object. And it also looks a bit weird, imho, if you try to add properties within the `tieredStorage` object (my first bullet point). 

To be clear, all I'm suggesting is that `tieredStorage` might be better named `remoteStorageManager`, since that's what it's configuring.

Reviewer: I think the APIs for custom things will be always ugly. The way I imagine it, we start with:

```yaml
tieredStorage:
  type: customRemoteStorageManager
  # ...
```

But in the future we can easily add new type for both custom RSM and RLLM:

```yaml
tieredStorage:
  type: custom
  # ...
```

or:

```yaml
tieredStorage:
  type: s3
  # ...
```

----

What you are proposing would not end up with

```yaml
remoteStorageManager:
  # ...
```

and

```yaml
remoteLogMetadataManager:
  # ...
```

But we will likely add also add some options for S3 tiered storage and HDFS tiered storage etc. which will look completely different. I do not think this is a better API than what is already in the proposal.

----

Maybe they can be somehow combined? We do today something like this:

```yaml
  tieredStorage:
    type: custom
    remoteStorageManager:
      className: <ClassName>
      classPath: <ClassPath>
      config:
        # A map with String keys and String values. Key fields will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.` and appended to Kafka broker config.
        <key>: <value>
```

And in the future we can extend it to:

```yaml
  tieredStorage:
    type: custom
    remoteStorageManager:
      className: <ClassName>
      classPath: <ClassPath>
      config:
        # A map with String keys and String values. Key fields will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.` and appended to Kafka broker config.
        <key>: <value>
    remoteLogMetadataManager:
      # If ^^^ is not configured, use the default RLMM
```

Would that work better? Hard to say. As far as I understood, there is no custom RLMM today and it is not clear what requirements it might have for configuration. But it would be a simple change and if we say that the `remoteLogMetadataManager` might be added int he future it will be easy to adjust the proposal.

Author: I like the nested `remoteStorageManager`, it's not too different than what we have proposed now and it makes the proposal more extensible in the future. I updated the proposal, PTAL

Reviewer: Does that work for you @tombentley?

Reviewer 5: I don't understand :disappointed::

```yaml
  tieredStorage:                         <1>
    type: custom                         <2>
    remoteStorageManager:
      className: <ClassName>
      classPath: <ClassPath>
      config:
        # A map with String keys and String values. Key fields will be automatically prefixed with `rsm.config.` and appended to Kafka broker config.
        <key>: <value>
    remoteLogMetadataManager:
      # If ^^^ is not configured, use the default RLMM
```

1. Why do we need `tieredStorage`? Why can't the `remoteStorageManager` and `remoteLogMetadataManager` be direct children of the `spec.kafka`?
2. What is the purpose of the `type: custom`? Do we really need it to support (in the future) RSMs built into the Strimzi images? We could just allow `classPath` to be omitted in that future, but make it required for now.

Reviewer: Re 1) That is what we are configuring, or?
Re 2) I think it is highly likely that we will want some better configuration for the most popular _types_ of tiered storage, yes. Not sure what it has to do with classpath eing required or optional.

Author: I prefer to keep `tieredStorage` as an umbrella wrapper for all related configs. It's clean and easy to manage and evolve the API object in the future.

Reviewer 3: I also agree, having `tieredStorage` as an unmbrella makes really clear what the user is configuring. When people talk about this feature they talk about "tiered storage". Then it comes to details to be configured like RSM and RLMM.

remote.log.storage.manager.class.path: /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/*
remote.log.storage.manager.impl.prefix: rsm.config.
rsm.config.storage.bucket.name=my-bucket
# Custom RLMM configs
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.topic.replication.factor: 1
```

### Validation

There are certain [limitations](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/Kafka+Tiered+Storage+Early+Access+Release+Notes) for a tiered storage enabled cluster. At the time of this proposal writing, these are the known limitations:
* Tiered storage is not supported on clusters utilizing the multiple Log directories on a broker (JBOD feature).
* Currently, tiered storage is not available for compacted topics.
* Once Tiered Storage is enabled for a topic, it becomes a permanent configuration and cannot be disabled.
* Disabling Tiered Storage for the entire cluster requires manual deletion of all topics using Tiered Storage.
* All Kafka clients, regardless of their version, can continue to produce and consume records from topics utilizing Tiered Storage. However, clients with versions earlier than 3.0 are limited in performing administrative actions, such as enabling Tiered Storage on a topic

> All the limitations above except the client compatibility are expected to be fixed before it is production-ready in Kafka.

Reviewer 6: Sorry, I was wrong about this before. Some limitation might not get fixed before (or maybe after production-ready). I think it's enough to make it clear we won't do any additional thing for them in operator side. Could you please remove this line? Thanks.

Author: done

#  Support tiered storage natively in Strimzi

## Current situation

Kafka introduced tiered storage feature since 3.6. The feature is in early stage and it’s nice to support tiered storage configuration natively via Strimzi.

## Motivation

> Supporting tiered storage via Strimzi allow Strimzi users to enable tiered storage natively with Strimzi config. By allowing to config custom configuration for RemoteStorageManager and RemoteLogMetadataManager, users are able to adopt tiered storage feature on Strimzi easily.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Supporting tiered storage via Strimzi allow Strimzi users to enable tiered storage natively with Strimzi config. By allowing to config custom configuration for `RemoteStorageManager` and `RemoteLogMetadataManager`, users are able to adopt tiered storage feature on Strimzi easily.
```

This proposal focuses on tiered storage support with a custom plugin brought in by the user. Other proposals in the future might add some built-in support for selected storage implementations such as S3. It should also be noted that, it’s on the end-user to ensure that their tiered storage setup works with Strimzi; the operator itself is strictly responsible for pushing down the necessary config to the broker pods.

## Proposal

### RemoteStorage

> Add a `tieredStorage` config under KafkaClusterSpec, which would support configuration for all tiered storage related configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Add a `spec.kafka.tieredStorage` field in the `Kafka` CR, which would support configuration for all tiered storage related configuration.
```

> The CustomTieredStorage class contains configuration for various aspects, including RLM config, RSM specific config, RLMM specific config. 

Reviewer 3: It's the first time you mention a `CustomTieredStorage` class.
I can imagine it's the class implementing the `tieredStorage` field in the Strimzi API related package? The class from the corresponding CRD part is generated.
If yes, it's not really understandable for a reader who doesn't know how Strimzi API model is designed and how the corresponding CRD is generated. I would avoid to talk about the class but still sticking with a custom resource field. Mentioning the structure of the class later if really needed.

Also being clear about what RLM, RSM, RLMM are.

Author: Updated.

```
kafka:
  tieredStorage:
      type: custom
      rlm:
        # See below detail
      rsm:
        # See below detail
      rlmm:
        # See below detail
```

### RLM

> The RLM config supports `default` type only.  The config allows users to specify basic configuration for RemoteLogManager in Kafka:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The RLM config supports `default` type only.  The config allows users to specify basic configuration for `RemoteLogManager` in Kafka:
```

```
      rlm:
        threadPoolSize:
        reader.threads:
        reader.maxPendingTasks:
```

### RSM

The RSM config only supports custom type. The config allows users to specify the RSM class information as well as other properties. 

Because the `RemoteStorageManager` dependency is provided by Kafka plugin, the implementation could vary case by case. It’s important to allow user to pass in additional configuration values within the supplied prefix range, thus config field is provided to pass in and generate such properties.

```
      rsm:
        type: custom
        class.name:
        class.path:  
        impl.prefix: rsm.config.
        config:
          property1:
          property2:
          ...
```

### RLMM

> The RLMM config configuration for RemoteLogMetadataManager class. The config allows users to specify RLMM class information as well as other RLMM related propertied. A CustomRLMM class is supported to allow user to supply information on a custom RLMM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The RLMM config configuration for `RemoteLogMetadataManager` class. The config allows users to specify RLMM class information as well as other RLMM related propertied. A CustomRLMM class is supported to allow user to supply information on a custom RLMM.
```

Reviewer 3: Again what's this `CustomRLMM` class? The one in the Strimzi API which reflects the fields in the CRD? Again it's not clear imho.

Author: Based on Jakub's feedback, I remove the RLMM section for simplicity.

> In a custom implementation, Because the dependency is provided by Kafka plugin, the implementation could vary case by case. It’s important to allow user to pass in additional configuration values within the supplied prefix range, thus config field is provided to pass in and generate such properties. Those properties will be concatonated with the prefix value and get applied at Kafka config.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a custom implementation, Because the dependency is provided by Kafka plugin, the implementation could vary case by case. It’s important to allow user to pass in additional configuration values within the supplied prefix range, thus config field is provided to pass in and generate such properties. Those properties will be concatenated with the prefix value and get applied at Kafka config.
```

```
      rlmm:
        type: custom
        impl.prefix: rlmm.config.
        class.name:
        class.path:
        config:
          property1:
          property2:
          ...
```

> RLMM has a built in implementation class called `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` . This class is supported in Kafka by default, rlmm config will support another type called TopicBasedRLMM . 

Reviewer 3: All the same comments apply to this `TopicBasedRLMM` class.

Author: This section is removed now

For simplicity, the proposal doesn't add support to customize `RemoteLogMetadataManager`. If tiered storage is enabled, the default implementation class `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` in Kafka will be used.

This proposal focuses on tiered storage support with a custom plugin brought in by the user. Other proposals in the future might add some built-in support for selected storage implementations such as S3. It should also be noted that, it’s on the end-user to ensure that their tiered storage setup works with Strimzi; the operator itself is strictly responsible for pushing down the necessary config to the broker pods.

## Proposal

Add a `spec.kafka.tieredStorage` field in the `Kafka` CR, which would support configuration for all tiered storage related configuration.

The `tieredStorage` config contains configuration for some selected configuration of tiered storage feature. Most importantly, the configuration for `RemoteStorageManager` is needed.

```
kafka:
  tieredStorage:

>       type: custom
>       rsm:
>         type: custom
>         class.name:
>         class.path:  
>         impl.prefix: rsm.config.

Reviewer: Some thoughts:
* Maybe you can flatten the structure
* You also do not need the `type` twice
* The fields that will be part of the API should use `camelCase`
* Not sure if it is clear what is being configured. So I guess the names can be either `class` / `classPath` or `storageManagerClass` / `storageManagerClassPath`
* While I'm not sure if we need a dedicated `config` section for the RLMM configured mostly by Strimzi (which I raised previously), it might make sense to have it for the storage manager. In such case, the prefix might not be needed?

```suggestion
      type: custom
      storageManagerClass: ...
      storageManagerClassPath: ...
      config:
        # ...
```

Author: Addressed other comments. For the last one, do you mean having all the config for RSM (these config will include configuration for the plugin library as well) in the config session here? I am fine with it but I am curious the rationale on not having such config for RLMM but keep it for RSM. I prefer to keep them consistent if possible.

```

### RemoteStorageManager (RSM)

The RSM config only supports custom type. The config allows users to specify the RSM class information.

Because the `RemoteStorageManager` dependency is provided by Kafka plugin, the implementation could vary case by case. It’s important to allow user to pass in additional configuration values within the supplied prefix range. The custom configuration can be supplied via  `spec.kafka.config` with the predefined prefix.

### RemoteLogMetadataManager (RLMM)

For simplicity, the proposal doesn't add customization for RemoteLogMetadataManager. If tiered storage is enabled, the default implementation using `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` will be used, and corresponding configuration will be appended. 

> 

Author: Added the explanation and some example config in the example section. Thanks!

#  Support tiered storage natively in Strimzi

## Current situation

Kafka introduced tiered storage feature since 3.6. The feature is in early stage and it’s nice to support tiered storage configuration natively via Strimzi.

## Motivation

Supporting tiered storage via Strimzi allow Strimzi users to enable tiered storage natively with Strimzi config. By allowing to config custom configuration for `RemoteStorageManager`, users are able to adopt tiered storage feature on Strimzi easily.

For simplicity, the proposal doesn't add support to customize `RemoteLogMetadataManager`. If tiered storage is enabled, the default implementation class `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` in Kafka will be used.

> This proposal focuses on tiered storage support with a custom plugin brought in by the user. Other proposals in the future might add some built-in support for selected storage implementations such as S3. It should also be noted that, it’s on the end-user to ensure that their tiered storage setup works with Strimzi; the operator itself is strictly responsible for pushing down the necessary config to the broker pods.

Reviewer 7: Does it mean that users are required to build their custom images based on Strimzi Kafka images? Can you provide an example? We should also consider having an automatism like we have for Kafka Connect, where you can specify plugins URLs in the configuration and the image is built for you.

Author: Yes in our case we customize the docker image based on Strimzi built image. The only customization we add is to copy the plugin library jar file into a plugin path. I include a section with an example dockerfile to build such image.

Reviewer 7: I'm fine with that. I don't know if we want to mention the automated build as rejected alternative with the motivation expressed by Jakub. It's up to you.

Because the `RemoteStorageManager` dependency is provided by Kafka plugin, the implementation could vary case by case. It’s important to allow user to pass in additional configuration values within the supplied prefix range. The custom configuration can be supplied via  `spec.kafka.config` with the predefined prefix.

### RemoteLogMetadataManager (RLMM)

For simplicity, the proposal doesn't add customization for RemoteLogMetadataManager. If tiered storage is enabled, the default implementation using `TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager` will be used, and corresponding configuration will be appended. 

Since the default RLMM will create an internal Kafka client to talk to the server, there might be some additional configuration needed, like the SSL related setting. Those config can be put in `.spec.kafka.config` directly using the `rlmm.config.` prefix. Example can be found below.

## Example configuration

The below config define a sample configuration for tiered storage setup, using a `custom` RSM type.
```
kafka:
  tieredStorage:
    type: custom
    rsm.className: com.example.kafka.tiered.storage.s3.S3RemoteStorageManager

>     rsm.classPath:  /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/*

Reviewer 7: Isn't better to remove this configuration and simply document some standard path where the Cluster Operator will search for TS plugin artifacts? This is similar to what we have for Kafka Connect plugins. Additionally, it would be easier to add built-in support for popular TS plugins if we decide to do so.

Reviewer: > Additionally, it would be easier to add built-in support for popular TS plugins if we decide to do so.

Isn't it against a hardcoded path? Having a configurable path makes it easier to:
* Have different implementations in the same image
* Having in the future a _built-in_ plugin in some path and yet allowing users to add a custom plugin to a custom path?

Reviewer 7: > Have different implementations in the same image

Well, I think you can copy different implementations in the same custom image, like we do with Kafka Connect connectors. Am I missing something?

Something like:

```sh
COPY ./my-plugins/ /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage/
```

> Having in the future a built-in plugin in some path and yet allowing users to add a custom plugin to a custom path?

They will still be able to build their custom images if needed right?

Reviewer: I did not look into the implementation in Kafka to be honest. But the way this is configured suggests very different behavior. Here you specify a classpath for a single plugin. For connectors, you specify a directory that contains separate subdirectories for each plugin loaded separately. So I do not think this is the same - you do not want to mix the tiered storage plugins. And you do not mix the connectors by putting them into the directory strucuture in plugins dir.

Author: In theory, I think you can copy many plugins, but just specify 1 path to use at runtime. I don't see a strong need for that, because only 1 RSM class will be used at a time, and it's up to the user to decide and config all the connectivity and setup for remote tier. For now I will not include it in the proposal.

Reviewer 2: Is it not possible that in the future Kafka will support multiple RSM's (e.g. per topic)? I haven't reviewed the latest KIPs so I'm not sure if Kafka has completely ruled out that possibility from the get go.

Author: This is a good idea but I didn't hear the discussion on this approach. @showuon are you aware of any such upcoming support?

remote.log.storage.manager.class.path: /opt/kafka/plugins/tiered-storage-s3/*
remote.log.storage.manager.impl.prefix: rsm.config.
# The RLMM config will be added by default
remote.log.metadata.manager.impl.prefix: rlmm.config.
remote.log.metadata.manager.class.name: org.apache.kafka.server.log.remote.metadata.storage.TopicBasedRemoteLogMetadataManager
# The RLMM config below are passed down from kafka config spec.
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.bootstrap.servers: broker-bootstrap.com:9091
rlmm.config.remote.log.metadata.common.client.security.protocol: SSL
```
## Testing strategy

Unit tests will be added to validate all the RLM,RSM, RLMM changes are propagated through.
Because the RSM and RLMM are typically provided by user and there is no built in support for any third party cloud provider, there won’t be any integration tests covering the cloud provider interaction. It’s the user’s responsibility to ensure the RSM and RLMM works with the intended cloud provider.

For testing purpose, an integration test with LocalTieredStorage implementation can be added to ensure end to end functionality.

## Affected Projects

> Strimzi operator will be affected with the change.

Reviewer 7: Are we sure that the Topic Operator won't be affected at all?

Author: Hi Federico, I am interested to understand more about it. IMO topic Operator is what manages the KafkaTopic resources. In our usage, we didn't touch the KafkaTopic resource. Is there any other areas that could affect topic operator in any way?

Reviewer 7: There are 2 error conditions that are relevant here:

1. TS is enabled on a compacted topic
2. TS is enabled on a topic created with a Kafka version before 2.8.0

I think the Topic Operator should disable these actions and provide warnings (both in KafkaTopic status and Topic Operator logs). We should also investigate if it's possible to detect the 2nd condition.

Reviewer: I think these points are worth mentioning in the proposal. That said, I do not think we should handle these in the code and we should leave it to the user's responsibility:
* At least some of them are expected to be removed in the future
* Validating them might be quite complex (for example, IIRC, the compacted topics can be set in the topic itself as well as in the broker defaults)
* Validating this in UTO would capture only a part of the topics and not prevent the users from misconfiguration. So they will still need to be aware of these rules and learn to respect them.

What we probably should mention in the proposal that we should at least one of manually validate the impact on the TO. E.g what happens when tiered storage is disabled and a user tries to create a topic with it? Will it be handled in a reasonable fashion (e.g. if there are errors, they are clear and so on)?

Reviewer 7: Yeah, I suspect that some changes will be required when you start looking into them more closely. I don't think the second point can be verified, so a documentation note should be enough.

Author: update the `Validation` section explicitly with the note that at this proposal we won't add complex validation
